Precipitation removal scheme for GCM (#1440)
CliMA/ClimateMachine.jl: docs/src/Theory/Atmos/Microphysics_0M.md

# Microphysics_0M

The `Microphysics_0M.jl` module defines a 0-moment bulk parameterization of

>   moisture sink due to precipitation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the moisture sink due to precipitation.
```

It offers a simplified way of removing the excess water
  without assuming anything about the size distributions of cloud
  or precipitation particles.

The ``q_{tot}`` (total water specific humidity) sink due to precipitation
  is obtained by relaxation with a constant timescale

>   to a state with precipitable water removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to a state with condensate exceeding a threshold value removed.
```
(note that precipitable water usually, and misleadingly, is understood to include water vapor)

> The threshold for when to remove ``q_{tot}`` is defined either by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The threshold for removing excess ``q_{tot}`` is defined either by the
```

  condensate specific humidity or supersaturation.
The thresholds and the relaxation timescale are defined in
  `CLIMAParameters.jl`.

> !!! note
> 
>     The implementation assumes that
>     ``q_{liq}`` (liquid water specific humidity) and
>     ``q_{ice}`` (ice water specific humidity) are in the auxiliary variables.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

!!! note

>     To remove precipitation instantly the relaxation timescale should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To remove precipitation instantly, the relaxation timescale should be
```

    equal to the timestep length.

## Moisture sink due to precipitation

> If based on maximum condensate specific humidity the sink is defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If based on maximum condensate specific humidity, the sink is defined as:
```

``` math
\begin{equation}
  \left. \mathcal{S}_{q_{tot}} \right|_{precip} =-
    \frac{max(0, q_{liq} + q_{ice} - q_{c0})}{\tau_{precip}}
\end{equation}
```
where:
  - ``q_{liq}``, ``q_{ice}`` are cloud liquid water and cloud ice specific humidities,
  - ``q_{c0}`` is the condensate specific humidity threshold above which water is removed,
  - ``\tau_{precip}`` is the relaxation timescale.

> If based on saturation excess the sink is defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If based on saturation excess, the sink is defined as:
```

```math
\begin{equation}
  \left. \mathcal{S}_{q_{tot}} \right|_{precip} =-
    \frac{max(0, q_{liq} + q_{ice} - S_{0} \, q_{vap}^{sat})}{\tau_{precip}}
\end{equation}
```
where:
  - ``q_{liq}``, ``q_{ice}`` are cloud liquid water and cloud ice specific humidities,
  - ``S_{0}`` is the supersaturation threshold above which water is removed,
  - ``q_{vap}^{sat}`` is the saturation specific humidity,
  - ``\tau_{precip}`` is the relaxation timescale.

## Coupling to the state variables

Following the conservation equations for
[moisture](https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/latest/Theory/Atmos/AtmosModel/#Moisture)

> and [mass](https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/latest/Theory/Atmos/AtmosModel/#Mass)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [mass](https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/latest/Theory/Atmos/AtmosModel/#Mass),
```

the ``\mathcal{S}_{q_{tot}}`` sink has to be multiplied by ``\rho`` before

>   adding as one of the sink terms to both moisture and mass state variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  adding it as one of the sink terms to both moisture and mass state variables.
```

For the conservation equation for

> [total energy](https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/latest/Theory/Atmos/AtmosModel/#Energy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[total energy](https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/latest/Theory/Atmos/AtmosModel/#Energy),
```

>   no additional source/sink terms $M$ are considered and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  no additional source/sink terms $M$ are considered, and the
```

  the sink due to removing ``q_{tot}`` is computed as:
```math
\begin{equation}

> \left. \sum_{j\in\{v,l,i\}}(I_j + \Phi)  \rho C(q_j \rightarrow q_p)) \right|_{precip} =

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\left. \sum_{j\in\{v,l,i\}}(I_j + \Phi)  \rho C(q_j \rightarrow q_p) \right|_{precip} =
```

>   \left(lf I_l + (1 - lf) I_i + \Phi \right)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \left[\lambda I_l + (1 - \lambda) I_i + \Phi \right)
```

>   \left[\lambda I_l + (1 - \lambda) I_i + \Phi \right)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  \left[\lambda I_l + (1 - \lambda) I_i + \Phi \right]
```
I think?

  \rho \, \left.\mathcal{S}_{q_{tot}} \right|_{precip}
\end{equation}
```
where:

>  - ``lf`` is the liquid fraction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - ``\lambda`` is the liquid fraction
```

 - ``I_l = c_{vl} (T - T_0)`` is the internal energy of liquid water
 - ``I_i = c_{vi} (T - T_0) - I_{i0}`` is the internal energy of ice
 - ``T`` is the temperature,

>  - ``T_0`` is the reference temperature,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - ``T_0`` is the thermodynamic reference temperature (which is unrelated to the reference temperature used in hydrostatic reference states used in the momentum equations),
```

## Precipitation removal tendency

If based on maximum condensate specific humidity the tendency is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
  \left. \frac{d \, q_{tot}}{dt} \right|_{precip} =-
    \frac{max(0, q_{liq} + q_{ice} - q_{c0})}{\tau_{precip}}
\end{equation}
```
where:
  - `q_{liq}`, `q_{ice}` are cloud liquid water and cloud ice specific humidities,
  - `q_{c0}` is the condensate specific humidity threshold above which water is removed,
  - `\tau_{precip}` is the relaxation timescale.

If based on saturation excess the tendency is defined as:
```math
\begin{equation}
  \left. \frac{d \, q_{tot}}{dt} \right|_{precip} =-
    \frac{max(0, q_{liq} + q_{ice} - S_{0} \, q_{vap}^{sat})}{\tau_{precip}}
\end{equation}
```
where:
  - `q_{liq}`, `q_{ice}` are cloud liquid water and cloud ice specific humidities,
  - `S_{0}` is the supersaturation threshold above which water is removed,
  - `q_{vap}^{sat}` is the saturation specific humidity,
  - `\tau_{precip}` is the relaxation timescale.

## Coupling to the state variables

Removing the `q_tot` changes the mass of the working fluid.
Therefore the state variables `\rho` and `\rho q_{tot}` are by:

> ```math

Reviewer: Better to express this as the source in the conservation law, which is not the same as the material derivative (but is what we need here). See Eq. (3.7) in the design doc.

Author: I have updated the docs and the code to follow the notation from the DDs. I'm still not sure about the total energy source term. I will send the link to the documentation once it is generated.

Author: https://clima.github.io/ClimateMachine.jl/previews/PR1440/Theory/Atmos/Microphysics_0M/

Reviewer 3: I looked at the docs. I'm still confused by the c_v,d term. For example when you remove q_liq (assuming no_ice) you lose the total energy of liquid. It looks strange to me that the source term is zero when c_v,l = c_v,d?

Author: ok - I think this is wrong and you are right. Will update again!
